Adding content as onboarding docs for razor (#9848)
dotnet/razor: docs/Onboarding Docs/01_Razor_Basics.md

﻿# Razor Basics

> Razor is a templating language used in ASP.NET for creating dynamic web pages. It's not a programming language itself, but a server-side markup syntax for embedding server-side code (C# or VB.NET) into HTML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Razor is a templating language used in ASP.NET for creating dynamic web pages. It's not a programming language itself, but a markup syntax for embedding code (C# or VB.NET) into HTML.
```

I would remove the words "server-side" from this, as Blazor can be purely client side.

In a Razor file, you can use a combination of several languages:

| Language | Usage | Supported in .NET Core and .NET 5+ |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Razor syntax** | Used to embed and execute server-side code within HTML. | Yes |
| **C#** | The server-side language used within Razor templates. Most commonly used with Razor. | Yes |
| **HTML** | Used to structure the content on web pages. | Yes |
| **JavaScript** | Used for client-side scripting in Razor templates. | Yes |
| **CSS** | Used for styling web pages. | Yes |
| **VB.NET** | Can be used in Razor syntax in the older .NET Framework. | No |

> Please note that while Razor syntax does support VB.NET in the older .NET Framework, VB.NET is not supported in .NET Core or .NET 5 and onwards for Razor views. In these newer frameworks, only C# is supported for Razor views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that while Razor syntax does support VB.NET in the older .NET Framework, VB.NET is not supported in .NET Core or .NET 5 and onwards. In these newer frameworks, only C# is supported.
```

Calling out "for Razor views" here makes it seem like it is supported in the other file types listed below, which it is not.

## Razor File Types

> Razor files typically have the `.cshtml`, `.vbhtml` or `.razor` extension. The distinction is not in the file extension, but in how and where the file is used within the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Razor files typically have the `.cshtml`, `.vbhtml` or `.razor` extension.
```

I don't think the last statement there is true. AFAIK a `.razor` file is always a Blazor component, and never a Razor Page, even when it has a `@page` directive in it.

| `.vbhtml` | Razor View (VB.NET) | Part of the MVC (Model-View-Controller) pattern, where the View is responsible for the presentation logic. Located within the Views folder of an MVC application and associated with a Controller. | Used in older MVC applications written in VB.NET. |

## Razor Editors: Legacy vs New

| Aspect | Razor Legacy | Legacy .NET Core Razor Editor | New .NET Core Razor Editor |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Introduction** | Introduced with ASP.NET MVC 3. | Older Razor editor for ASP.NET Core projects. | Updated Razor editor introduced in Visual Studio 2019 version 16.8. |
| **Usage** | Used in ASP.NET MVC and ASP.NET Web Pages applications. | Used for editing Razor views and pages in ASP.NET Core projects. | Used for editing Razor views and pages in ASP.NET Core projects. |
| **Source code** | Closed source. | Closed source. | [Open source on GitHub](https://github.com/dotnet/razor/) |

> | **File Extensions** | `.cshtml` for C#, `.vbhtml` for VB.NET. | N/A | N/A |

Reviewer 2: .cshtml/.razor for the N/A fields

Author: ```suggestion
| **File Extensions** | `.cshtml` for C#, `.vbhtml` for VB.NET. | `.cshtml` and `.razor` | `.cshtml` and `.razor` |
```

| **Functionality** | Creates dynamic web pages that combine HTML and server-side code. | Provides basic features like syntax highlighting and IntelliSense for Razor syntax. | Provides improved functionality and performance, including better IntelliSense, improved syntax highlighting, support for Razor formatting, better diagnostics, and features like "Go to Definition" and "Find All References" for Razor components and their parameters. |

> | **Support** | Still supported for maintaining existing applications. New development typically done using newer versions of Razor in ASP.NET Core. | N/A | N/A |

Reviewer 2: The n/a's are a bit confusing

> | **Configuration** | N/A | To switch to the legacy editor, go to "Tools" > "Options" > "Environment" > "Preview Features" and uncheck the box that says "Use the new Razor editor for .NET Core apps". | To switch to the new editor, go to "Tools" > "Options" > "Environment" > "Preview Features" and check the box that says "Use the new Razor editor for .NET Core apps". |

Reviewer 2: Legacy editor is used by default for .NET fx apps, .NET core legacy editor is off-by-default backed by the feature, vice-versa for the new editor

Author: ```suggestion
| **Configuration** | Used by default for .NET Framework applications. | The legacy .NET Core editor is off by default. | The new .NET Core editor is used by default. |
```

> | **Configuration** | N/A | To switch to the legacy editor, go to "Tools" > "Options" > "Environment" > "Preview Features" and uncheck the box that says "Use the new Razor editor for .NET Core apps". | To switch to the new editor, go to "Tools" > "Options" > "Environment" > "Preview Features" and check the box that says "Use the new Razor editor for .NET Core apps". |

Reviewer: The option called out here is only available to internal Microsoft employees. It's worth either mentioning that, or changing this to mention the other location for flipping this flag, which is Tools > Options > Text Editor > HTML > Advanced

> | **Implementation** | N/A | Had a more monolithic design, with all language services being provided directly by the editor. Did not use LSP or TextMate grammars, and its integration with the rest of Visual Studio was more limited. | Implemented using the Language Server Protocol (LSP), which allows it to provide language services like IntelliSense, diagnostics, and code actions. Uses TextMate grammars for syntax highlighting, providing consistent and accurate highlighting for Razor, C#, and HTML. Integrated with the rest of Visual Studio through the editor API, allowing it to provide features like "Go to Definition", "Find All References", and code actions that work seamlessly with the rest of the IDE. Includes special support for Blazor. |

Reviewer 2: First column is same as second (no N/A)

Author: ```suggestion
| **Implementation** | Monolithic design, language services implemented by the editor, no LSP or TextMate grammars, limited VS integration. | Same as Razor Legacy | Uses LSP for language services, TextMate grammars for syntax highlighting, integrated with VS editor API, includes Blazor support. |
```

## Razor Support Across ASP.NET Versions

Different versions of ASP.NET support different features of Razor. Here's a summary:

| TFM | Razor Support |
| --- | --- |
| **.NET Framework (<= 4.8)** | Supports Razor syntax with C# and VB.NET. Used in ASP.NET MVC and ASP.NET Web Pages applications. |

> | **.NET Core 1.x - 3.1** | Supports Razor syntax with C# only. Used in ASP.NET Core MVC and Razor Pages applications. |

Reviewer 2: IIRC Blazor was in preview at this time too which was supported then. Don't know if it's worth calling out

Author: ```suggestion
| **.NET Core 1.x - 3.1** | Supports Razor syntax with C# only. Used in ASP.NET Core MVC, Razor Pages applications, and had preview support for Blazor. |
```
